---
title: Hanami 2.2.0.beta2
date: 2024-09-25 13:00:00 UTC
tags: announcements
author: Tim Riley
image: true
excerpt: >
  Rounding out the database layer: MySQL, powerful multi-database support, plus full contracts in actions
---

We’re back to round out the brand new database layer [we introduced](/blog/2024/07/16/hanami-220beta1) in our previous beta release. This time around, we’re adding MySQL, introducing a powerful new way of working with multiple databases, and bringing you a little treat at the same time: full validation contract support in actions!

## MySQL support

Now you can generate a new Hanami app with `hanami new my_app --database=mysql` and have a ready-to-go MySQL-backed Hanami app! All `hanami db` commands (like `db prepare`, `db migrate`, etc.) have been updated to manage your MySQL database over the lifecycle of your app.

## Multiple gateways

With beta1, we introduced the idea of distinct databases per slice. Now with beta2, you can mix and match multiple databases within _any_ slice! This comes courtesy of ROM’s gateways, which you can now setup as part of Hanami’s database layer.

Gateways in ROM represent a connection to a distinct database. You can use them within your relations by declaring a `gateway`:

```ruby
module MyApp
  module Relations
    class Uploads < MyApp::DB::Relation
      # Use the `uploads` table from the `:artifacts` gateway.
      gateway :artifacts
      schema :uploads, infer: true
    end
  end
end
```

By using gateways via relations, you can have your database layer seamlessly work with data from multiple sources, all while maintaining a streamlined public interface via your repos.

You can configure multiple gateways without any additional config. Just set an appropriately named ENV var:

```
# The standard :default gateway
DATABASE_URL=sqlite://db/app.sqlite

# An :artifacts gateway
DATABASE_URL__ARTIFACTS=sqlite://db/artifacts.sqlite
```

You can also use ENV vars to set up gateways for slices too:

```
MY_SLICE__DATABASE_URL=sqlite://db/my_slice.sqlite
MY_SLICE__DATABASE_URL__ARTIFACTS=sqlite://db/my_slice-artifacts.sqlite
```

For more advanced cases, you can configure gateways explicitly, inside your `:db` provider:

```ruby
Hanami.app.configure_provider :db do
  # Explicitly configure a gateway
  config.gateway :artifacts do |gw|
    # If not configured, will still be filled from `ENV["DATABASE_URL__ARTIFACTS"]`
    gw.database_url = "..."

    # Specify an adapter to use
    gw.adapter :yaml

    # Or configure an adapter explicitly
    gw.adapter :yaml do |a|
      # You can call `a.plugin` here
      # Or also `a.extension` if this is an `:sql` adapter
    end
  end

  # Multiple gateways can be configured
  config.gateway :another do |gw|
    # ...
  end
end
```

All `hanami db` commands are multi-gateway-aware. By default, they will operate on all configured databases for an app. You can also target a specific gateway’s database by passing the `--app --gateway=gw_name` or `--slice=slice_name --gateway=gw_name` arguments.

You can also pass a `--gateway` argument to `hanami generate migration` to generate a migration for a specific gateway.

For more detail on gateway configuration, [see this pull request](https://github.com/hanami/hanami/pull/1452).

## ROM commands and mappers

We also completed the last piece of ROM integration work: integrated [commands](https://rom-rb.org/learn/core/5.2/commands/) and [mappers](https://rom-rb.org/learn/core/5.2/mappers/). These are advanced components of ROM, and if you need them in a Hanami app, now you can place them in `app/db/commands/` and `app/db/mappers/` and they’ll be automatically registered.

## Full validation contracts for actions

By popular demand, we’ve taken a little detour from our database work to implement support for full [dry-validation](http://dry-rb.org/gems/dry-validation/) contracts for your actions. Now you can use `contract` within an action class and access all the features of dry-validation, especially rules:

```ruby
module MyApp
  module Actions
    module SignUp
      class Create < MyApp::Action
        contract do
          params do
            required(:birth_date).filled(:date)
          end

          rule(:birth_date) do
            if value < (Date.today << (12 * 18))
              key.failure("you must be 18 years or older")
            end
          end
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

You can also provide a `Dry::Validation::Contract` class directly, which is helpful if you want to share validation rules across actions as well as other domain objects:

```ruby
class Create < MyApp::Action
  contract SignUp::Contract
end
```

Or you can even inject a contract object as a dependency, which is useful if the contract itself has dependencies from elsewhere in your app:

```ruby
class Create < MyApp::Action
  include Deps[contract: "sign_up.contract"]
end
```

## We need your help!

With this beta, we’re another step closer to 2.2.0 proper, so we need your help with testing, especially if you’re a MySQL user, or have a use case that could be served by our multi-gateway support.

We’ve already updated our [getting started guides](https://guides.hanamirb.org/v2.2/introduction/getting-started/) to walk you through your first Hanami 2.2 app, database layer included. Please give this a try, then [let us know how you go](https://discourse.hanamirb.org).

## What’s next? A release candidate, then 2.2.0.

Our current goal is to have Hanami 2.2.0 ready by [RubyConf](https://rubyconf.org), where Sean Collins will be giving [an introductory workshop](https://rubyconf.org/schedule/) (Day 2, Salon A1).

Between now and then, we plan to make one more release: a single release candidate, towards the end of October. Take a look at [our project board](https://github.com/orgs/hanami/projects/6/views/1) to see the work we have remaining.

## What’s included?

Today we’re releasing the following gems:

- hanami v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-assets v2.2.0-beta.2 (npm package)
- hanami-assets v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-cli v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-controller v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-db v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-reloader v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-router v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-rspec v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-utils v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-validations v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-view v2.2.0.beta2
- hanami-webconsole v2.2.0.beta2

For specific changes in this release, please see each gem’s own CHANGELOG.

## How can I try it?

```shell
> gem install hanami --pre
> hanami new my_app
> cd my_app
> bundle exec hanami dev
```

## Contributors

Thank you to these fine people for contributing to this release!

- [Adam Lassek](https://github.com/alassek)
- [Krzysztof Piotrowski](https://github.com/krzykamil)
- [Kyle Plump](https://github.com/kyleplump) — congrats on your first contributions, Kyle!
- [Sean Collins](https://github.com/cllns)
- [Tim Riley](https://github.com/timriley)

## Thank you

Thank you as always for supporting Hanami! We can’t wait to hear from you about this beta! 🌸
